Cost-effectiveness of health insurance among women engaged in transactional sex and impacts on HIV transmission in Cameroon: A Mathematical Model


Introduction HIV prevalence disproportionately affects high-risk populations, particularly female sex workers in Africa. Women and girls engaging in transactional sex (WGTS) also face significant health risks due to unsafe practices, economic vulnerabilities and stigma but unlike female sex workers, they are not considered a key population in national HIV programmes and like many other informal groups do not benefit from any form of financial protection. .

Methods Using existing literature and evidence generated in the POWER randomised controlled trial, we developed a deterministic compartmental model to assess HIV dynamics among WGTS, their sugar daddies, and low-risk populations. We evaluated the cost-effectiveness of a new structural intervention to prevent HIV among women engaging in transactional sex in urban Cameroon. The intervention consisted in providing free health care to women engaged in transactional sex as well as their economic dependents through a health insurance package. We explored the cost-effectiveness of this intervention considering various coverage levels (0%, 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100%). We calculated the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) per disability-adjusted life year (DALY) and HIV infections averted, employing both univariable and global sensitivity analyses. Probabilistic sensitivity analyses considered all parameters, including insurance efficacy in reducing HIV, comparing simulated ICERs to willingness-to-pay (WTP) thresholds. We also compared the health insurance strategy with expanding PrEP coverage. We used 2023£ and a 3% discount rate.

Results Implementing health insurance coverage levels of 25%, 50%, 75%, and 100% yielded ICERs per DALY averted of £2,795 (£2,483—£2,824), £2,541 (£2,370—£2,592), £2,263 (£2,156—£2,316), and £1,952 (£1,891—£1,998), respectively, in comparison to a 0% coverage scenario. Probabilistic sensitivity analysis indicated an ICER of £2,128 per DALY averted at 100% coverage, with 58% of simulations showing that the ICERs was below the GDP per capita and 76% below three-times the GDP per capita. Sustaining health insurance efficacy at a minimum of 70% could provide significant health and economic benefits. However, ART efficacy significantly impacted HIV infection prevention (PRCC=-0·62, p<0·001) in global sensitivity analyses; expanding ART could reduce the cost-effectiveness of health insurance. While PrEP alone is not cost-effective, expanding its coverage to 20% combined with 75-100% health insurance for WGTS is most effective for maximising DALYs averted (ICER/DALY averted = £2,436-£2,102) and reducing the number of infections.

Interpretation A comprehensive health insurance scheme for WGTS in Cameroon can significantly avert HIV infections and DALYs, particularly at higher coverage levels, emphasizing the need for targeted, inclusive healthcare policies for marginalised women at high risk of HIV.
